src/main/asciidoc/appendix/build.adoc, before:

[[building-SDN]]
= Building Spring Data Neo4j

[[building-SDN.requirements]]
== Requirements

* JDK 8+ (Can be https://openjdk.java.net[OpenJDK] or https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/index.html[Oracle JDK])
* Maven 3.6.2 (We provide the Maven wrapper, see `mvnw` respectively `mvnw.cmd` in the project root; the wrapper downloads the appropriate Maven version automatically)
* A Neo4j 3.5.+ database, either
** running locally
** or indirectly via https://www.testcontainers.org[Testcontainers] and https://www.docker.com[Docker]

[[building-SDN.jdk.version]]
=== About the JDK version

Choosing JDK 8 is a decision influenced by various aspects

* SDN is a Spring Data project.
Spring Data commons baseline is still JDK 8 and so is Spring Framework's baseline.
Thus, it is only natural to keep the JDK 8 baseline.
* While there is an increase of projects started with JDK 11 (which is Oracle's current LTS release of Java), many existing projects are still on JDK 8. We don't want to lose them as users right from the start.

[[building-SDN.running-the-build]]
== Running the build

The following sections are alternatives and roughly sorted by increased effort.

All builds require a local copy of the project:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[checkout-SDN]]
.Clone SDN
----
$ git clone git@github.com:spring-projects/spring-data-neo4j.git
----

Before you proceed, verify your locally installed JDK version.
The output should be similar:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[verify-jdk]]
.Verify your JDK
----
$ java -version
java version "12.0.1" 2019-04-16
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 12.0.1+12)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 12.0.1+12, mixed mode, sharing)
----

[[building-SDN.docker]]
=== With Docker installed

[[building-SDN.docker.default-image]]
==== Using the default image

If you don't have https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Docker_(software)[Docker] installed, head over to https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop[Docker Desktop].
In short, Docker is a tool that helps you running lightweight software images using OS-level virtualization in so-called containers.

Our build uses https://www.testcontainers.org/modules/databases/neo4j/[Testcontainers Neo4j] to bring up a database instance.

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-default-bash]]
.Build with default settings on Linux / macOS
----
$ ./mvnw clean verify
----

On a Windows machine, use

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-default-windows]]
.Build with default settings on Windows
----
$ mvnw.cmd clean verify
----

The output should be similar.

[[building-SDN.docker.another-image]]
==== Using another image

The image version to use can be configured through an environmental variable like this:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-other-image]]
.Build using a different Neo4j Docker image
----
$ SDN_NEO4J_VERSION=3.5.11-enterprise SDN_NEO4J_ACCEPT_COMMERCIAL_EDITION=yes ./mvnw clean verify
----

Here we are using 3.5.11 enterprise and also accept the license agreement.

Consult your operating system or shell manual on how to define environment variables if specifying them inline does not work for you.

[[building-SDN.local-database]]
=== Against a locally running database

WARNING: Running against a locally running database *will* erase its complete content.

Building against a locally running database is faster, as it does not restart a container each time.
We do this a lot during our development.

You can get a copy of Neo4j at our https://neo4j.com/download-center/#enterprise[download center] free of charge.

Please download the version applicable to your operating system and follow the instructions to start it.
A required step is to open a browser and go to http://localhost:7474 after you started the database and change the default password from `neo4j` to something of your liking.

After that, you can run a complete build by specifying the local `bolt` URL:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-using-locally-running-database]]
.Build using a locally running database
----
$ SDN_NEO4J_URL=bolt://localhost:7687 SDN_NEO4J_PASSWORD=secret ./mvnw clean verify
----

[[building-SDN.environment-variables]]
== Summary of environment variables controlling the build

[cols="3,1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Name|Default value|Meaning

|`SDN_NEO4J_VERSION`
|3.5.6
|Version of the Neo4j docker image to use, see https://hub.docker.com/_/neo4j[Neo4j Docker Official Images]

|`SDN_NEO4J_ACCEPT_COMMERCIAL_EDITION`
|no
|Some tests may require the enterprise edition of Neo4j.
We build and test against the enterprise edition internally, but we won't force you
to accept the license if you don't want to.

|`SDN_NEO4J_URL`
|not set
|Setting this environment allows connecting to a locally running Neo4j instance.
We use this a lot during development.

|`SDN_NEO4J_PASSWORD`
|not set
|Password for the `neo4j` user of the instance configured with `SDN_NEO4J_URL`.

|===

NOTE: You need to set both `SDN_NEO4J_URL` and `SDN_NEO4J_PASSWORD` to use a local instance.

[[building-SDN.checkstyle-and-co]]
== Checkstyle and friends

There is no quality gate in place at the moment to ensure that the code/test ratio stays as is, but please consider adding tests to your contributions.

We have some rather mild checkstyle rules in place, enforcing more or less default Java formatting rules.
Your build will break on formatting errors or something like unused imports.

[[building-SDN.jqassistant]]
=== jQAssistant

We also use https://jqassistant.org[jQAssistant], a Neo4j-based tool, to verify some aspects of our architecture.
The rules are described with Cypher and your build will break when they are violated:

include::../../../../etc/jqassistant/index.adoc[leveloffset=4]

[[building-SDN.jqassistant.database]]
==== Accessing the jQAssistant database

jQAssistant uses Neo4j to store information about a project.
To access the database, please build the project as described above.
When the build finishes, execute the following command:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[start-jqassistant]]
.Start jQAssistant
----
$ ./mvnw -pl org.springframework.data.neo4j:spring-data-neo4j jqassistant:server
----

Access the standard Neo4j browser at http://localhost:7474 and a dedicated jQA-Dashboard at http://localhost:7474/jqassistant/dashboard/.

The scanning and analyzing can be triggered individually, without going through the full verify again:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[scan-with-jqassistant]]
.Manually scan and analyze the main project
----
$ ./mvnw -pl org.springframework.data.neo4j:spring-data-neo4j jqassistant:scan@jqassistant-scan
$ ./mvnw -pl org.springframework.data.neo4j:spring-data-neo4j jqassistant:analyze@jqassistant-analyze
----

Commit message:

Update to Spring Data Commons 3.0.0 and JDK 17.
- Adapt to javax -> jakarta changes
- Throw out jboss weld dependencies and just use open beans
- Upgrade to latest jQAssistant version that can deal with JDK 17 byte code but disable it as it can't fork a vm for the embedded database which would require a couple of `--add-opens` which we won't have on by default and document that accordingly
- Use `maven.compiler.release`

src/main/asciidoc/appendix/build.adoc, after:

[[building-SDN]]
= Building Spring Data Neo4j

[[building-SDN.requirements]]
== Requirements

* JDK 8+ (Can be https://openjdk.java.net[OpenJDK] or https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/index.html[Oracle JDK])
* Maven 3.6.2 (We provide the Maven wrapper, see `mvnw` respectively `mvnw.cmd` in the project root; the wrapper downloads the appropriate Maven version automatically)
* A Neo4j 3.5.+ database, either
** running locally
** or indirectly via https://www.testcontainers.org[Testcontainers] and https://www.docker.com[Docker]

[[building-SDN.jdk.version]]
=== About the JDK version

Choosing JDK 8 is a decision influenced by various aspects

* SDN is a Spring Data project.
Spring Data commons baseline is still JDK 8 and so is Spring Framework's baseline.
Thus, it is only natural to keep the JDK 8 baseline.
* While there is an increase of projects started with JDK 11 (which is Oracle's current LTS release of Java), many existing projects are still on JDK 8. We don't want to lose them as users right from the start.

[[building-SDN.running-the-build]]
== Running the build

The following sections are alternatives and roughly sorted by increased effort.

All builds require a local copy of the project:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[checkout-SDN]]
.Clone SDN
----
$ git clone git@github.com:spring-projects/spring-data-neo4j.git
----

Before you proceed, verify your locally installed JDK version.
The output should be similar:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[verify-jdk]]
.Verify your JDK
----
$ java -version
java version "12.0.1" 2019-04-16
Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 12.0.1+12)
Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 12.0.1+12, mixed mode, sharing)
----

[[building-SDN.docker]]
=== With Docker installed

[[building-SDN.docker.default-image]]
==== Using the default image

If you don't have https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Docker_(software)[Docker] installed, head over to https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop[Docker Desktop].
In short, Docker is a tool that helps you running lightweight software images using OS-level virtualization in so-called containers.

Our build uses https://www.testcontainers.org/modules/databases/neo4j/[Testcontainers Neo4j] to bring up a database instance.

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-default-bash]]
.Build with default settings on Linux / macOS
----
$ ./mvnw clean verify
----

On a Windows machine, use

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-default-windows]]
.Build with default settings on Windows
----
$ mvnw.cmd clean verify
----

The output should be similar.

[[building-SDN.docker.another-image]]
==== Using another image

The image version to use can be configured through an environmental variable like this:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-other-image]]
.Build using a different Neo4j Docker image
----
$ SDN_NEO4J_VERSION=3.5.11-enterprise SDN_NEO4J_ACCEPT_COMMERCIAL_EDITION=yes ./mvnw clean verify
----

Here we are using 3.5.11 enterprise and also accept the license agreement.

Consult your operating system or shell manual on how to define environment variables if specifying them inline does not work for you.

[[building-SDN.local-database]]
=== Against a locally running database

WARNING: Running against a locally running database *will* erase its complete content.

Building against a locally running database is faster, as it does not restart a container each time.
We do this a lot during our development.

You can get a copy of Neo4j at our https://neo4j.com/download-center/#enterprise[download center] free of charge.

Please download the version applicable to your operating system and follow the instructions to start it.
A required step is to open a browser and go to http://localhost:7474 after you started the database and change the default password from `neo4j` to something of your liking.

After that, you can run a complete build by specifying the local `bolt` URL:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[build-using-locally-running-database]]
.Build using a locally running database
----
$ SDN_NEO4J_URL=bolt://localhost:7687 SDN_NEO4J_PASSWORD=secret ./mvnw clean verify
----

[[building-SDN.environment-variables]]
== Summary of environment variables controlling the build

[cols="3,1,3",options="header"]
|===
|Name|Default value|Meaning

|`SDN_NEO4J_VERSION`
|3.5.6
|Version of the Neo4j docker image to use, see https://hub.docker.com/_/neo4j[Neo4j Docker Official Images]

|`SDN_NEO4J_ACCEPT_COMMERCIAL_EDITION`
|no
|Some tests may require the enterprise edition of Neo4j.
We build and test against the enterprise edition internally, but we won't force you
to accept the license if you don't want to.

|`SDN_NEO4J_URL`
|not set
|Setting this environment allows connecting to a locally running Neo4j instance.
We use this a lot during development.

|`SDN_NEO4J_PASSWORD`
|not set
|Password for the `neo4j` user of the instance configured with `SDN_NEO4J_URL`.

|===

NOTE: You need to set both `SDN_NEO4J_URL` and `SDN_NEO4J_PASSWORD` to use a local instance.

[[building-SDN.checkstyle-and-co]]
== Checkstyle and friends

There is no quality gate in place at the moment to ensure that the code/test ratio stays as is, but please consider adding tests to your contributions.

We have some rather mild checkstyle rules in place, enforcing more or less default Java formatting rules.
Your build will break on formatting errors or something like unused imports.

[[building-SDN.jqassistant]]
=== jQAssistant

WARNING: Verification of those rules is off by default since Spring Data Neo4j 7, as the it requires JDK 17 to build.
         The currently available version of jQAssistant does not run without several `--add-opens` arguments to the Java
         module system and we won't apply this to the whole build as we must ensure that SDN itself does *not* need them.
         +
         To execute the rules during a build run the build like this:
         +
         +
         `MAVEN_OPTS="--add-opens java.base/sun.nio.ch=ALL-UNNAMED --add-opens java.base/java.lang=ALL-UNNAMED" ./mvnw -DskipArchitectureTests=false -DskipTests=true verify`


We also use https://jqassistant.org[jQAssistant], a Neo4j-based tool, to verify some aspects of our architecture.
The rules are described with Cypher and your build will break when they are violated:

include::../../../../etc/jqassistant/index.adoc[leveloffset=4]

[[building-SDN.jqassistant.database]]
==== Accessing the jQAssistant database

jQAssistant uses Neo4j to store information about a project.
To access the database, please build the project as described above.
When the build finishes, execute the following command:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[start-jqassistant]]
.Start jQAssistant
----
$ MAVEN_OPTS="--add-opens java.base/sun.nio.ch=ALL-UNNAMED --add-opens java.base/java.lang=ALL-UNNAMED" ./mvnw -DskipArchitectureTests=false jqassistant:server
----

Access the standard Neo4j browser at http://localhost:7474 and a dedicated jQA-Dashboard at http://localhost:7474/jqassistant/dashboard/.

The scanning and analyzing can be triggered individually, without going through the full verify again:

[source,console,subs="verbatim,attributes"]
[[scan-with-jqassistant]]
.Manually scan and analyze the main project
----
$ MAVEN_OPTS="--add-opens java.base/sun.nio.ch=ALL-UNNAMED --add-opens java.base/java.lang=ALL-UNNAMED" ./mvnw -DskipArchitectureTests=false jqassistant:scan@jqassistant-scan
$ MAVEN_OPTS="--add-opens java.base/sun.nio.ch=ALL-UNNAMED --add-opens java.base/java.lang=ALL-UNNAMED" ./mvnw -DskipArchitectureTests=false jqassistant:analyze@jqassistant-analyze
----
